am biased by OAB indication - short answer is that the agency likes this as a safety check - but patient interpretation is problematic
I appreciate the agency position. I personally believe the dipstick to be of limited use if any. This is based on teh studies that have been conducted of which I am aware
it has not been studied whether or not consumers can properly use a dipstick. If the FDA decides that they want this, I think new studies will need to be conducted to demonstrate that consumers can interpret the readings and then whether they will behave accordingly.
yes- absolutely. Cant speak for the FDA but i think its overkill
Agree. Suggesting studies to demonstrate competence in reading nad interpreting the dipstick is a dangerous route to go I would fee. The main idea has to be to not mandate dipstick as a prerequisite. The findings in the studies done to date are fairly limited.
I would elimintae as this is one more thing that will be a "speed bump" the consumer will have to get right to use the product correctly. Agree with other comment to date
I believe we can put this to rest. Most - but perhaps not the agency - believe the dipstick is an unnecessary complication in this process with limited yield of what is called a medically relevant condition
I see little value in enclosing a dipstick. It would detect very few of the co-morbid conditions of concern. Perhaps an algorithm of questions that include family history risk factors, symptoms and signs might work better to identify these other conditions of concern.
In response to Daenerys Targaryen's comment about studying whether consumers can use a urine dipstick correctly it might be informative to know that in the tamsulosin OTC program urine samples were analyzed initially by the pharmacy staff but then using a dipstick reader. In these studies we did asses what, if anything, consumers did when they were told about a finding in their urine sample and were advised to seek medical advice. The data generated in the studies that included a urine dipstick at baseline will be pooled to understand how many men followed up on this advice and if they didn't what their rationale was not to seek advice. In the final actual use study the urine dipstick was repeated at end-of-study if it was abnormal at baseline and data on why men choose not to speak to their doctor even after a repeat dipstick finding will be analyzed.
That is helpful. If the AC and the FDA get stuck on dipsticks, though, what is missing is the ability to see that consumers can actually dip the stick and see the color changes for blood, glucose, etc, read those changes and then understand what the changes mean. In the study it appears that men were told that an abnormality was there and to see a doctor but were not asked to interpret the dipstick findings on their own. It appears that you don't plan to use a dipstick anyway because company feels the data weren't suggestive that it was not needed. My comment is just to help think about what might come up if FDA or the AC members disagree.
Your response is exactly what we were hoping to get as the goal of this virtual Advisory Board is just that: to think about what might come up if FDA or the AC members disagree with the company position. Thank you for helping us think these issues through.
I believe we can put this to rest. Most - but perhaps not the agency - believe the dipstick is an RE Claus Gregor's comment that most believe a dipstick is an unnecessary complication in this process with limited yield of what is called a medically relevant condition. I'm okay with this, BUT would like to know the specific data (preferably publications) that support this, and what the standards of care used by PCPs and UROs states on this subject. Again, as with some of my other comments, the open discussion on this should determine if there is any subtype of potential users of alphaBs which might actually benefit from a dipsick test, and if so, then determine then how this might be handled in labeling (i.e., special precaution to some users, or contraindication to some users).
I think you should not include a urine dipstick. The labeling should be adequate to drive the consumer to the physician if necessary. If the dipstick is included in the package, the use would have to be tested. In the absence of data that demonstrates the the dipstick is necessary to properly use the product, the inclusion adds an unnecessary layer of complexity to using the product correctly
Let's put Question # 3 to rest. This group is not in favor and does not see a benefit in it
This appears to be the case but I think that it will be important to craft a cogent argument that will convince the FDA and the non-urologists on the advisory committee of the same. That argument, I think, rests in demonstrating that the delay of diagnosis of an underlying serious medical condition is not of clinical significance.
Claus, please do not misrepresent my comment of Oct 19. Gregor
I think that doing such is a mistake
I'm coming in late with my response to the first round of question, having spent the last week away from Westeros. A agree a dipstick is not necessary and will overly complicate the OTC paradigm with a drug and a device.
