no i dont think so - we did this with OAB and patients seem to be able to make correct decisions and understand their co-existent issues. in other words i do think that they are appropriate the symptoms mentioned only can be confuse with underactive bladder which may have similar type symptoms
detrusor underactivity is a difficult to diagnose and not as common condition. In selected clinic and urodynamic series it may occur in 15% or so. I agree that the symptoms may partially overlap, but even MD provider will likely give alpha blocker to those pts as they do not have a full UDS examination to review.
It's not inappropriate for these patients to take tamsulosin. The main issue is going to be whether or not the data are considered adequate to demonstrate that people who have not been diagnosed already with these comorbid conditions and take OTC tamsulosin hydrochloride receive their diagnosis promptly. If the data are adequate to show that the OTC drug does not delay the diagnosis long enough to result in adverse consequences then this should be acceptable.
I really dont think so. I guess the issue is not the underlying comorbidity but whether the individual is taking medications for certain conditions that might interact with the alpha blocker. Specifically, if they are on certain anti-hypertensive meds which might increase the risk of orthostasis. Seems like a small number of meds and patients but something the FDA might raise.
re Brian Stark: virtually all alpha blockers including tamsulosin have been studied with mostly all antihypertensive classes and the AEs are not higher in those pts on antihypertensives. Orthostasis specifically is about 0.5% across all studies. re Targaryen: receiving a diagnosis I would not imagine is a concern. What diagnosis specifically do you think might be delayed? I am not really clear on this.
From the wording of your question, I am assuming these are patients who are already Dx with the condition. But is could also be extended to patients who have not been Dx yet and trying to treat a symptom Thus a concern, whether real or hypothetical, would be to prove that the underlying condition would not produce one of the symptoms you are trying to treat. Also if a patient is being treated with a Rx drug, could one of the side effects be one of the urinary tract condition listed above that the patient now tries to treat on their own with the OTC product?
I will try to address the last items here: clearly, many pts present with frequency, and nocturia when they are on antihypertensives specifically diuretics, they just don't put 2 and 2 together in that way. a medical provider would pick up on that and point it out and try to mitigate. I have found many pts in the actual use study being on diuretics and having frequency. That is an issue dificult to resolve.
We might be able to avoid some long-term misuse by encouraging a medical evaluation after 3 months of use.
None of the currently mentioned conditions are an absolute contraindication to giving tamsulosin, and alpha blockers have been given regularly to patients with all of these co-morbidities. If our concern is the as-yet-undiscovered diagnosis, this is a risk with just about all OTCs which could delay an actual pathologic diagnosis that might be useful to know. This is a known risk of OTCs. The adverse effects and how to recognize them needs to be very clear. Also, patients who use tamsulosin OTC over the counter can be encouraged to talk with their physician at some point to "clarify their condition and see if some additional treatment is needed."
and actually in the actual use studies many pts state that they plan to bring it up with their doctor. whether they do or not is a different question
We could consider encouraging them to bring it up whether or not there symptoms are relieved if they have been using the OTC for over 3 months. This would encourage men to go to physician for check-up. (Maybe)
I think this is a very important point that has been raised by FDA over the years. A consumer/pt may say they would talk to their but d they really do that. Issue will be to show what the potential consumer would do and back it with data. Not what they say they would do.. which is the correct answer but hard to measure in an AUT if they did not do it.
All that an OTC company can do is recommend medical consultation and make as convincing an argument as possible that it is i nthe consumers' interest. This is a lot for a package insert but it might need to be done.
Do you have data regarding how internists or family practice physicians prescribe tamsulosin? How often is the product given in the current practice environment as a trial for a couple of weeks without a urologic workup?
I will speak to that: alpha blockers for LUTS/BPH are prescribed by PCP and URO and both groups prescribe probably equally common I would say the guidelines provide guidance what test to do prior to prescribing, but really, just the H&P, DRE perhaps, PSA if indicated and an quantitative questionnaire are required. If you will, most pts are given a Rx on a trial basis, but not for 2 wks, usually for much longer. I try for example to tell pts to send me a MyChart message after 4 wks with update.. but.. most pts don't do that!
I agree. At least 4 weeks would be the time for most PCPs to see if the medicine helps and/or an adverse event occurs. Of course, pts are alerted in advance to possible adverse events and advised to stop immediately if one occurs.
In reply to Claus re PCP and URO prescribing of alphaBs for LUTS/BPH, an important issue is how the OTC labelig matches up with the current standard of care provided by PCPs and UROs. If the standards of care include a trial run, and that is the UK model, perhaps the discussion should move to why no trial run (e.g., 30 days). For the organizer, it would be good at this stage to have a proposed argument for why no trial period in the U.S., and an unbiased discussion of the group of what conditions, if any, would be appropriate for a trial run (which might be handled by exclusionary labeling.
It would seem from the data collected in the exploratory actual use study that men do mimic the "trial run" if you like as 36.7% only purchased 1 box of study drug and never returned to the participating pharmacy to repurchase product.
Do you have any info about why men did not but a second box in the exploratory actual use study?
No we did not
I do not believe an OTC product currently available uses the word 'trial' or 'trial run' on the label. This would seem somewhat unorthodox as well. What is on the label is the instruction to 'see your doctor if you have no improvement or worsening" or such language. I would argue that essentially is the essence of a 'trial' and what providers do. I tell my pts to take it and after one mo call or email me or communicate in the EMR. One problem is that few pts do that despite me giving them my cell phone number. if they have no benefit they either stop or continue without thinking much about it This is not all that difference from the studies done here.
So if they stop use or continue using without thinking much about it what ultimately happens with them? Have they had an evaluation from you prior to giving them the medication? How do you think the populations in a typical practice compare with the proposed OTC population with regard to risk?
The last sentence from Daenerys is more to the point re Claus' comment. The more that can be done to have data to demonstrate patient demographics, refill rates (and non-refill rates), reasons for decisions to continue or to stop, to seek a MD visit or not, etc., the better for the argument. Some of us on the team remember when the OTC Review actually used physician experience by testimony as valid support for OTCness and labeling, but as we know this is a much more data-driven process. Hence, my interest in seeing any additional information along these lines that the company can share.
Yes, Gregor described what I was thinking about but in more detail. I think that the more information that you have to show similarity between the populations and use behaviors for tamsulosin hydrochloride in the prescription and OTC settings, the more strength that your argument for OTCness will have.
This requires us to encourage consumers to think like clinciians. This may be difficult. Perhaps some abbreviated use of a risk/benefit ratio might be helpful in the insert?
Not really. The label is the surrogate for the clinician. If the product as prescribed is given to a population that is much like the OTC self-selector population then this information may mitigate concerns on the part of the Advisory Committee.
But to get the man to "think like a doctor" may require some unique way of designing an algorithm and/or noting risk/benefit considerations rather than simply displaying a list of information."
All conditions where MD involvement is needed, not self treatment
Proposing a "trial run" after a brief use of the product is not a workable approach. It might work in the U.K. where the pharmacist is the :"gate keeper", but in the U.S. the product would be available on the shelf without the need for a learned intermediary. If an drug-drug interaction or a specific contraindication is needed for the product to be approved OTC, the caution must be on the label and understood by the consumer.
Yes, OTCness is predicated on the label, suitable evidence of label comprehension, and to the extent that the AUS provides evidence of how self-selecting consumers behave in the context of the label, and the drug being studies in the AUS. A couple of comments ago, Daenerys stated "How do you think the populations in a typical practice compare with the proposed OTC population with regard to risk?" The question is better stated, not as "how do you think" (i.e., opine), but how do studies convincingly demonstrate that populations in a typical practice compare with the proposed OTC population with regard to risk? The complement is, do the data demonstrate that the physician selection of men suitable for alphaBs is reasonably comparable to self-selection, wherein through this answer the label is shown adequate.
This is an interesting question and, at this point, can only be determined by focus groups and/or simulation exercises. These may or may not be accurate. There is always a risk that consumers will use OTC for misinterpreted reasons All that can be done is to try to put the indications, and the algorithm to help men decide whether or not this medicine is right for them, in as clear language as possible. I am still in favor of trying to encourage men to see their physicians even if the medicine is working if they continue to use it regularly for some set amount of time. Clinicians want to know what meds their patients are taking, especially ones that may be taken eveyr day for a long period of time.
i still think that they can
These are all the types of concerns that an Advisory Committee would have and the sponsor needs to make a clear case that men are coping with these conditions for long periods of time (months or years) without consulting an HCP. So the incremental risk of trying tamsulosin hydrochloride would be low, as long as there are no contraindications. Plus the label and insert should be demonstrated to drive increased physician interactions.
