i would anticipate a rate similar to the untreated male population i.e. 2 / 1000
as below
PS i appreciate the Thrones reference but would prefer to be Jon Snow
This is a question without key information. Among other questions are the following. From a review of them, you'll see that a bit more specificity would be helpful. In general, however, a trial of 1,000 could easily miss uncommon and rare events. Best to gives us a specific objective of the study, and some inclusion/exclusion criteria, along the line of my questions below. o What were the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study? (e.g., normal bp or HTN, DM or not, all normal healthy with no risk factors for heart disease, previous MI or not, etc.???) o What therapy was allowed…daily aspirin or not? o What is the range of ages? 21-80 years, 45-75 years? o Is it a normal distribution that reflects the mean age of 60? o What is the distribution of underlying disease? o There are many causes of cardiovascular events (arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, certain types of cancer, drug therapy used to treat certain types of cancer, carotid and coronary artery disease. Hence what is the definition of cardiovascular? o Why is ‘adverse’ in the question? Wouldn’t ‘fatal’ suffice? Bill Soller
Inclusion Criteria: 1. Men, 18 years of age and older 2. Able to speak, read and understand English. 3. Subject or anyone in their household is not currently employed by a marketing or marketing research company, an advertising agency or public relations firm, a pharmacy or pharmaceutical company, a manufacturer of medicines, a managed care or health insurance company as a certified or licensed healthcare professional or in a healthcare practice 4. Subject has not participated in any clinical trial within the past 12 months. 5. Able to sign an Informed Consent Form and the HIPAA form 6. Willing and able to provide contact information Exclusion Criteria: 1. Report an allergy to tamsulosin or sulfa drugs 2. Report current use of a medication listed on under the “Do not use” section of the DFL. 3. Choose not to purchase the study product 4. Do not provide informed consent or sign the HIPAA form 5. Do not provide contact information
...I note my comments is listed under Gregor Cleganes ...how did that happen? See below re my comments on need for additional information. BIll Soller
Everyone was given an alias except the Active Co-Chair. Our experience is that this allows for a more robust/uninhibited conversation..
I dont know the exact number but i would expect it to be the same as the untreated male population 9as mentioned by one of the other respondents)
I would like to know the death rate in the clinical trials and how that compares with what you are seeing in your actual use study. I would also want to know the cause of each death and whether the death could be attributed to study drug or somehow to the use of the drug in the OTC environment. What were the cardiovascular events? Were any due to syncope secondary to the drug? If so, how does this correlate with what was seen in the clinical trials? What was the death rate in the placebo arm in the clinical trials and to what were those deaths due?
I do not have information on actual rates of death and CV events in the studies but Wade Leon may?
As the drug has been approved and marketed for a number of years you have a baseline to use as a comparison. However in an OTC setting if the profile seen in OTC vs Rx setting is changing one would need to understand what is driving the fatal CV event. So it is not an absolute number but rather an event by event investigation especially if it is something that is being driven by an underlying disease or in a consumer who over-rode the label to select and use the product. However if it is occurring in consumers at ow risk and the drug is causing this it could be problem especially since the drug would be taken for chronic use and is being used to treat a "lifestyle" condition. In summary it is not just a number but understanding the reason for the events. Further we do not know what consumer/pts where enrolled in the study, how many had CV disease at base lien so it really is a benefit vs risk assessment and absolute numbers don't always come into play.
I have to ask again for Wade to perhaps provide some data. How much of that really did happen in how many pts, ie n/N is what we need here!
I agree, as stated earlier, more information and context is needed. Not that long ago we did a headache study on and NCE which had mild antiplatelet properties, and a young female study participant had a hemorrhagic stroke in the study. One occurrence of a very rare event in the population more likely to have the event in the eneral population may more likely be viewed as unrelated to the treatment (depending on the moa of the treatment), but two less so, and in any case any deaths in a trial needs individual investigation, contextualized by the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the trial.
When the details of the analysis are known, if the conclusion is an increase in fatal CV events of any magnitude that cannot be explained by data collection issues will be a problem. Of course, the statistical significance is important and the interpretation of "causation" will also have an impact.
Dear Advisors, for this question we provided you with a link to the CDC’s Deaths and Mortality Statistics webpage to help with answering this question. Using this link: http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html one can search for underlying causes of death from 1999-2014 and sort/filter by region, demographics, cause of death, gender, etc.
I don't know that the Advisory Committee would consider the death statistics presented to be so relevant. I think that more relevant is the comparison of the populations in the Rx clinical trials and the population in the AUS and the specifics of each death case.
In the randomized controlled clinical trials (RCT) with tamsulosin significant comorbidity was an exclusion criterion, especially cardiovascular comorbidity. Thus the RCT study populations do not resemble an allcomers OTC-simulated study population. The postmarketing experience data might be more in line with what one could expect in an OTC environment than the experience in the RCTs. An internal evaluation of the safety data relating to cardiovascular events and tamsulosin was performed and the results do not support a causal relationship. As part of the NDA submission a full analysis will be performed on all available pharmacovigilance databases (external and internal) to assess this relationship further.
I agree that the CDC data are not helpful. Do you have other information that is more specific to the issue?
Would it be helpful to know more about the circumstances? Ie did the men who had fatal CV events have preexistent CAD, HTN, prior MI etc? what was their concomitant medication? Is there data available to this effect? I feel that the members of the adboard have a difficult time making statements in what essentially is a data vacuum?!
Yes, data helps drive conclusions and sort through opinions.
Not many
More information is needed.
Echoing the other comments, the risk is low in that sample for that duration that an event will occur which cannot be readily explained by actual circumstances of the subject's health history and the event itself. As is often the case, the sponsor has to accept a small risk that a serious AE occurs which is possibly drug related and cannot be readily explained.
