the likelihood may or may not be low i think the demographics should not detract from the standpoint that men want treatment and i think that this option would be well accepted. this population likely might have co-morbidities as your research has suggested but the frequency of same should not factor against this. the biggest risk is urinary retention which we know from the 5 alpha reductase data occurs in a small per cent on an annual basis- but results in little real morbidity
Indeed, AUR has an incidence of 1% or 1 out of 100 men per year in population based studies. IN placebo control studies of men with BPH / LUTS it may be as high a 2-5% It is interesting to note that one comorbid condition, prostate cancer, was mentioned as a caveat by the FDA, but many of those pts we actually do not treat or discourage even the pursuit of a diagnosis.
The likelihood of undiagnosed medically significant conditions is there. Can you address the risk on a population basis? The small percent in your studies will still translate into a lot of men in actual numbers who will have these undiagnosed conditions once the drug is OTC. The big issue is what happens with these undiagnosed men. If the medication gets them to the doctor sooner than later, then the OTC drug may offer a benefit and won't be harmful. If it delays a cancer diagnosis by a significant period of time, this will be a problem.
Seems like the likelihood is low but Claus' point bears mentioning. I do think that the FDA will raise the issue of missed prostate cancer again and while Claus is correct in stating that we now routinely use active surveillance in low-risk men, one might postulate that the men with prostate cancer "causing" LUTS (cause in quotations because, lets face it, its pretty rare that CaP causes LUTS although we like to make that connection) are more likely to have higher risk cancer. I personally think that this is probably not the case but i could see the FDA raising this issue.
To build off the line of discussions to date, you need to define the specific conditions you are going to refer. While the likelihood of an diagnosed condition may be low it is not zero and it is this issue that FDA will raise to the Advisory Committee. Once it hits the public forum of the Ad Com it is.hard to win over physicians on the panel by saying the risk is "acceptable: So it becomes a political issue even though it may have started as a medical issue, especially since the main issue has been missed prostate cancer. So from a pure regulatory point of view, while the risk may be low,the issue is not if it is "acceptable" it is what are the consequences of a misdiagnosis for the consumer.
Is it not a bit hypocritical for our Government to say through the USPSTF "NO" to any and all PSA testing in any men, and then say through the FDA that we must make sure we don't miss the prostate cancer diagnosis? I really do not see how this issue can be raised by the FDA in the current climate.
Different agencies, different agenda...you are right but you are assuming that they are accountable to one another- which they arent
This is a good question that is hard to answer. Is there a way that an OTC can be available but it does not significantly delay seeing a physician. I know that men will do what they choose, but if we recommend seeing a physician if the OTC is being used for more than a specific amount of time or if the urinary condition is not improved, we might get more men in to see the physician. Perhaps the OTC algorithm needs to be clear about other potential risks and encourage men to visit a physician for regular check-up. Another way to encourage physician visits is to note a few symptoms/signs that might indicate something more serious and recommend a medical appointment.
I think the AdCom will be concerned about a lot of potential missed diagnoses. Diabetes and UTIs were an issue of discussion for Oxytrol because there were concerns that delaying the diagnosis can lead to significant systemic illness fairly rapidly. Can anyone speak more about what is known about the symptoms of bladder cancer becoming more obvious once LUTS/BPH symptoms are relieved in a man with both of these conditions? This is what the briefing materials mention. Bladder cancer diagnosis delay may be a big concern for the AdCom and for the FDA. Having a well honed argument to address why this diagnosis delay would not be a major concern would be important. Do we have any idea how frequently bladder cancer and LUTS/BPH are present concomitantly?
BPH increases in prevalence with age, 60% at age 60 etc. Bladder cancer is a disease of the elderly as well and thus both occur together frequently. The actual diagnoses of bladder cancer was very low in the first study where all pts had full evaluation by a urologist. Wade can perhaps provide actual data. Bladder cancer detection is most the time based on hematuria, rarely due to urgency and frequency (that is often stated in textbooks but rarely happens in real life. The issue raised is the carcinoma in situ example) I would say that concern is low on my radar.
Of the 729 men who were referred for a urologic assessment in Study 527.83, one subject had an undiagnosed bladder cancer. This cancer was not causing or contributing to the urinary symptoms according to the study urologist, but was the cause of the abnormal urine dipstick finding. This specific individual reported that he saw his HCP on a very regular basis and had in fact see him/her within the month prior to study participation.
This is an interesting discussion, but with blog discussions it can get to the point of being a bit scattered with the possibility of some points being lost. It's a certainty that the issue of the potential risk of an undiagnosed condition will be raised. I think a more systematic approach should be taken to answering this, and would like to suggest to the organizer/company to present into the discussion an safety algorithm that depicts types of consumers by diagnosed and undiagnosed conditions of importance, including the type of information/studies that mitigate concern with that putative risk.
the suggestion to develop a safety algorithm is an interesting one. The company team has not approached the issue from that angle as there is no agreed upon definition of what constitutes a "condition of importance" and the Agency's concern is not only linked to undagnosed conditions but also exacerbations of or suboptimally treated or even untreated known pathology. The potential "types" of consumers is vast as many men reported not seeing a HCP for their diagnosed pathology or not being compliant with the maganement regimen. The pre-read document reflects some of the conditions the Agency has focussed on throughout the development program and our position on the topic.
The safety algorithm fits the diagnostic model used in medicine. That will be the perspective of a number of adv. com. members. And, by 'systemitizing' the argument in an algorithm adv com member and FDA see the process visually. Some pluses to the idea, I think.
Perhaps all the decisions about "to use or not to use" and "to see MD or not to see MD" can be put into one usable algorithm for LUTS sufferers.
I hear what everyone is saying and tend to agree with you. That being said, my experience with the Agency has been that they often tend to be overly cautious- particularly in quality of life conditions. Even though its just one case of bladder cancer, one wonders if perhaps the ad com might end up saying its one too many- particularly if they are lead that way by the FDA officials (which i have also seen). I think the way to handle is to underscore that most of the things that might be missed are NOT going to be medically significant. Many of the prostate cancer cases that might be are going to be indolent. A single case of low-grade bladder cancer missed is not a big deal...and in all cases, the short delay in diagnosis if it is something real wont change the long term outcome.
What specific data do you have to support your viewpoint? It's the Mssouri philosophy at FDA, as in the "show me" state. Also, the agency perspective is to grant you the "most of cases" argument, but to want to more closely examine the tails of the distribution. Quite a while ago, a prominent FDA OTC official said the bar for OTCs is higher than Rx. As aspect of this is that one cannot discount the tails of the distribution, but rather address it head on with facts, clinical experience defined by standards of care, and best of all data. I reiterate my call for an infusion of data into this blog.
I agree that the key is to be able to demonstrate that if there is a delay in diagnosis (and there will be in the OTC setting) that the delay will be short and not of clinical consequence. I think that there is a case to be made that there is a difference between a delay in diagnosis and a missed diagnosis. I think that the NDA should be clear on that difference. Consider conduct a survey of patients who have been diagnosed with the conditions in your list (e.g., bladder ca, prostate ca, OAB, chronic prostatitis) and how long they had experienced their symptoms prior to seeking medical attention. I think that if you can show that there is a substantial lag time between symptom onset and seeking physician input for LUTS conditions other than BPH then you can easily make the argument that a 2-week use of OTC tamsulosin hydrochloride won't be clinically meaningful in that context. Do you know the expectation of benefit of the men who take tamsulosin hydrochloride? Do they expect to be urinating with the same flow that they had when they were 20? My guess would be that they would not have that expectation. I think FDA will be concerned about those men who have a concomitant condition with BPH/LUTS who obtain partial relief from tamsulosin hydrochloride, are comfortable enough with the improvement not to bother getting checked out, and don't discuss their symptoms with their physician.
Your point...."FDA will be concerned about those men who have a concomitant condition with BPH/LUTS who obtain partial relief from tamsulosin hydrochloride, are comfortable enough with the improvement not to bother getting checked out, and don't discuss their symptoms with their physician..." is right on.
Good question. This might be approachable by advising men who are using the OTC product successfully for more than 3 months should see a physician. I mentioned this elsewhere in this dialogue and pointed out that Prilosec OTC package ibnsert says "see MD if using for more than 14 days" and see MD if using more than 4 times in one year. I suspect that there are other OTCs which recommend seeing an MD if use is continued even with resolution of sx.
There are data from the early studies in which all men with any findings underwent full evaluation by a urologist. These data suggest a fairly low incidence of medically significant diseases. I have to leave it to Annelie or Wade to actually 'infuse these data' into the discussion. From my knowledge it was a low incidence.
Perhaps we can see some of this information? List of MSD, relevance of study rates to general population rates, importance of including people with known MSD, or excluding through labeling etc.
We can debate what the incidence is of undiagnosed conditions but key will be is you are suggesting that the OTC label and conditions of use will be different than the Rx label. As noted in the Warning section of the Rx insert: " Screening for Prostate Cancer Prostate cancer and BPH frequently co-exist; therefore, patients should be screened for the presence of prostate cancer prior to treatment with tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules and at regular intervals afterwards". Question is how will you handle this as the OTC label will not capture this condition of use for physicians? Does it set up a set of conditions that can not be currently met in the OTC arena. (Just thoughts for consideration-Are you suggesting that the Rx label will be changes or different than the OTC label).
We don't know from current data as a unknown (I suspect very large) bias exists. Heretofore as such patients are weaned out prior to evaluation
It seems to me that the risk to individuals with significant conditions that have not been diagnosed is not great with a 2 to 4 week trial of the product. If improvement in the BPH symptoms does not improve after using the product for 4 weeks, the individual is unlikely to make another purchase. Failure to improve symptoms may in fact serve to drive the individual to see a physician In general, men are less likely to see a physician except for an annual physical. Failing to get improvement of the symptoms of BPH may actually serve to scare men in to making an appointment.
Maybe, Theon, tamsulosin hydrochloride needs new labeling? Shenk J et al. Association of Symptomatic Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia and Prostate Cancer: Results from the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial. Am J Epidemiol. 2011 Jun 15; 173(12): 1419–1428. This study examined the association between symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer risk in 5,068 placebo-arm participants enrolled in the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (1993–2003). These data include 1,225 men whose cancer was detected during the 7-year trial—556 detected for cause (following abnormal prostate-specific antigen or digital rectal examination) and 669 detected not for cause (without indication), as well as 3,843 men who had biopsy-proven absence of prostate cancer at the trial end. Symptomatic BPH was assessed hierarchically as self-report of surgical or medical treatment, moderately severe symptoms (International Prostate Symptom Score >14), or physician diagnosis, and analyses were completed by BPH status at baseline (prevalent) or BPH prior to cancer diagnosis or study end (prevalent plus incident). Controlled for age, race, and body mass index, neither prevalent (risk ratio = 1.03, 95% confidence interval: 0.92, 1.14) nor prevalent plus incident (risk ratio = 0.96, 95% confidence interval: 0.87, 1.06) symptomatic BPH was associated with prostate cancer risk. This lack of association was consistent across subgroups defined by type of BPH-defining event (treatment, symptoms, or physician diagnosis), prompt for prostate cancer diagnosis, and prostate cancer grade. This study provides the strongest evidence to date that BPH does not increase the risk of prostate cancer.
As with the previous question, it is really important to survey and characterize what men who develop these symptoms are actually doing about it. Are they coping and managing through lifestyle changes for months or years before raising the topic with a doctor? If they try tamsulosin hydrochloride and it works for them, can we assume that there is a very high likelihood that it was simple BPH? If not, can it be demonstrated that they will stop taking and be no worse off than before? Or can it be demonstrated that some will actually consult a physician? If so, a net positive public health outcome can be argued as a benefit of having an OTC treatment option with responsible educational labeling.
