I would suggest that the label say "enlarged prostate urinary symptom reliever" (or some such combination of words. Most men of a certain age wake up to go so one symptom is going to be present automatically in the vast majority of older men. Do you want to include some bother reference? I will leave it up to the urologists in the group to determine if the list is a good compilation of all the common BPH symptoms listed in usual BPH/LUTS guidelines.
I agree with Kahi Drogo. The tamsulosin hydrochloride label uses the full name of the condition that we are discussing as "benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)". The Urology Care Foundation (i.e,. "official" foundation of the American Urological Association) defines benign prostatic hyperplasia in its consumer education page as: "Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is an enlarged prostate." By contrast, prostatitis has urinary symptoms, such as painful, difficult and/or frequent urinating. Hence, my view is that you have the best definition of treating a "benign" condition if you use "enlarged prostate urinary symptom reliever."
actually the condition is no longer correctly referred toes BPH but rather benign prostatic obstruction of BPO how about lower urinary symptom reliever
BPO is not the tamsulosin hydrochloride indication: tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules are indicated for the treatment of the signs and symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules are not indicated for the treatment of hypertension." A discussion point for the group might be to focus on how the indication phrase can be consistent with tamsulosin hydrochloride AND support OTC limitations of use, if that's possible.
Those are similar enough, perhaps .he newer version is better
This version is better
I favor urinary symptom reliever. Hard for a lay person to say its from their prostat. BPH is not really a commonly used term and the tamsulosin hydrochloride indication was given decades ago.
This is difficult because we are trying to express the medical indication in consumer friendly language. So the approach is to stick with the actual symptoms rather than assume the source of the symptoms is BPH. Many if not most men over 50 are likely to know some basics about prostate health (this can be tested) and the problems of urine flow which are fairly common with advancing age. However, benign prostatic hypertrophy is not likely to be well understood and company has found the best intermediate language which includes the word prostate. This language also nicely parallels the symptoms of OAB which are in the Oxytrol For Women patch OTC labeling.
BPH, is benign prostatic hyperplasia, per the tamsulosin hydrochloride indication I share a few comments ago. I also mentioned that The Urology Care Foundation (i.e,. "official" foundation of the American Urological Association) defines benign prostatic hyperplasia in its consumer education page as: "Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is an enlarged prostate." By contrast, prostatitis has urinary symptoms, such as painful, difficult and/or frequent urinating. ALSO, I'll add now that the UCF defined in its consumer education interstitial cystitis (IC) as "a chronic health condition that causes pain and pressure in the bladder and pelvic area. Because of this, it is sometimes called painful bladder syndrome. IC can cause an urgent need to urinate, a frequent need to urinate, or both." Note no mention of prostate. So, "urinary symptom reliever" would cover BPH, prostatitis and IC. Hence, I restated my view is that you have the best definition of treating a "benign" condition if you use "enlarged prostate urinary symptom reliever." The company would also be able to align with UCF.
There are two problems with the "enlarged prostate": 1) the size of the prostate does not correlate with symptoms severity as even small prostates can cause severe and bothersome symptoms 2) a consumer can not determine the size of an internal organ Taking into account that women experience LUTS as well a phrase that makes the product gender specific was needed in the purpose statement. Together with the Agency we agreed upon "prostate urinary symptoms"
So, it would have been helpful to know that you already had agency agreement on the phrase, "prostate urinary symptoms." Has the agency agreed on the rest of the label as well?
Can say "symptoms most commonly (or "often") caused by enlarged prostate." The purpose of saying "enlarged" is simply to educate the pt about the most common source of the symptoms, not to encourage them to measure their own prostate size. Perhaps saying "enlarged prostate" as a possible cause of the symptom will encourage men to consider seeing a physician if sx are persistent.
For the urologists in the group, are their signs and symptoms of BPH that you think are missing in this indication? In the label comprehension study work did they assess the meaning of "prostate urinary symptom reliever" to the OTC consumer?
No the team did not ask consumers what they believed prostate urinary symptoms meant. We did assess how well the study subjects understood the description of what prostate urinary symptoms could be.
Good questions, Andrea. I mentioned what the Urology Care Foundation uses in their consumer education. It might be useful to look on the NIH web pages for consumer ed and other groups (e.g., Mayo, Harvard). If there is concurrence, then maybe it's just easier to adopt than swim upstream.
I suggest keeping the focus of the label on symptoms that the consumer can recognize. Accordingly, I think wording: Prostate symptom reliever such as waking to go, going too often, weak stream or dribbling and starting and stopping.
What concerns, if any, do you have regarding the adequacy of the current description of what constitutes prostate urinary symptoms? The label lumps the symptoms all together, however science makes a distiction between storage and voiding symptoms; does that need to be taken into account? Do you think that this will be a concern to the FDA or advisory committee?
The label, in my opinion, needs to be written for the medically "unsophisticated" consumer. To this end, the distinction between storage and emptying symptoms isnt really has important as the descriptions of the symptoms you have included above. I still dont love the inclusion of the word "prostate" in urinary symptom reliever as i think many consumers dot really get what the prostate is or how it might cause symptoms. That being said, if you provide descriptives, i think you are fine and can even leave the term prostate. I have no concerns with the way you have catalogued the symptoms and i doubt the FDA would either.
I agree with Bran. I don't think the consumer will care about the distinction. The consumer will be reading and trying to identify symptom by symptom.
Assuming that tamsulosin relieves both storage and voiding symptoms equally, then there is no need to distinguish on the label. The most important symptoms to list are the ones that bother men most, are most likely to drive men to acquire the medication, and are most likely to be successfully decreased with the medication treatment.
I think you may need to prioritize some of the symptoms, I was to pick going to often and starting and stopping is this really a reason to use the drug and can this be due to other underlying conditions or age itself. It is also rather subjective, isn't it. May wish to consider trying to identify the most frequent reasons that would have less chance of masking something else, which could make it easier to get a positive vote at NDAC. Also the word "prostate " is still somewhat troubling.. can you provide the PDP? (How do you describe the product on the PDP as this is the first thing the consumer will look for when they want to buy the product?) This may help refine our answers to this question.
