1. Appropriate self-identification of BPH symptoms.(confusion with sexual dysfucntion) 2. Inappropriate expectations of relief/cure 3. Side-effects of medication, drug interactions (notably hypotension) 4. MIssing significant pathology 5. Sensibly interpreting risk/benefit ratio
Kahi Drago has a good list. Under "missing significant pathology" I would expand this to address underlying conditions, comorbidities. In addition, I would add "Labeling related issues: legibility of the label, health literacy", and also add "Inherent risk taking behavior of a subset(s) of the target population." Also, and perhaps most important from a larger policy perspective, putting AlphaBs on the OTC market for BPH symptoms may well mean that men with very mild/mild symptoms will engage in treatment, when the prevailing view (right or wrong, or partially right and partially wrong) is to wait until symptoms are "significant." I use "significant" as this is the descriptor used on many respected MD-associated sites with consumer education. For example, some might opine that mild symptoms might better be approached with lifestyle changes, such as dietary changes, liquid volume restriction several hours before bedtime, etc. Thus, under circumstances of use of AlphaBs for milder conditions may change the benefit/risk ratio of Switch, since what is occurring in general practice is different from what is projected to happen through self-care. Several years ago, I engaged in designing and fielding a survey for a Rx/OTC switch candidate, finding that in fact, for the drug/disease we were interested in, physicians had for years already been prescribing for milder forms of the disease. This helped a lot. QUESTION: does company have any information on this point?
company does not have information that would allow us to understand whether physicians are prescribing tamsulosin to men with mild symptoms. In the OTC-simulated studies we did collect data about the use of the AUA recommended lifestyle modification (responses were "ever used", "still using" and "never used")
Well, OTCness may mean men with milder symptoms will self select an alphaB. However, if current practice shows men with milder symptoms often are part of the prescribing population, then that's helpful as mentioned in a prior comment, i remarked that his changes the benefit risk assessment, but likely modestly. These are not hard data to collect.
It is probably "bother" more than the presence of multiple specific symptoms that c will drive OTC use. Many physicians also use the same criterion.
as noted mis diagnosis is the key one patine ability to correctly understand their symptoms and perhaps distinguish from infectious issues is also a concern
Traditionally, OTCness embodied recognition of symptoms vs. diagnosis. So in that sense, "misdiagnosis" per se may not be the question, since it suggests the consumer is dianogisnig their condition. Perhaps then the question is: can the consumer distinguish between symptoms of different prostate related diseases/conditions to then act on those self-observations to see a physician for a diagnosis.. ALong this line of reasoning, the focus is on self-recognition of symptoms not the diagnosis or misdiagnosis of the disease/condition. If a person can select-in based on the label, can they (will they) appropriately select-out when they read the warnings, or when they self-observe no improvement (persistence of symptoms) or emergence of new symptoms or worsening of symptoms.
Conflicting diagnoses
I think Khal Drogo's list is very good. I really dont think you want patients to diagnose themselves. you are selecting out patients with symptoms- because this is what patients understand- how they feel. you are going to select out patients who are bothered and that may impact effectiveness. That being said, patients are going to confuse some symptoms etc,
I agree with the list in general and would like to build on Gregor Clegane's remarks. It might be entirely semantic, but it is important to avoid describing the consumer's self-selection decision as self-diganosis per se. This is not what we want them to do. Nor is it what we want reveiwers and Advisory Committee members to obsess upon. What we can say is that these are setf-recognizable symptoms which are most likely to be associated with BPH (which only a doctor can diagnose) and can be managed through appropriate use of this product.
Self-selection is a broader term than self-diagnosis because it includes consideration of indications and warnings. Regarding the indication, company seems to have chosen a series of symptoms that people can self-identify. One difficulty in self-diagnosis may be found in the numbers that are part of the OTC indication - "two or more for at least three months." The number of and duration of the symptoms are as important as the symptoms themselves in leading a consumer to make the correct self-selection decision. How do my colleagues feel about men choosing the product if they have just one symptom and have had it for fewer than 3 months? Is there a safety argument would you recommend that company make to the FDA if they have men in their self-selection studies who fall into that category or self-selection decision error? Are there particular concerns that you have regarding self-selection errors as they relate to warnings on the tamsulosin hydrochloride label? Which ones do you think are the absolute contraindications that would put men in such danger that if consumers with those contraindications incorrectly self-selected to use tamsulosin hydrochloride these errors would kill the OTC program? Why do you feel that way? Are there any mitigating arguments that you think company could make in this regard?
My REPLIES to Andrea’s questions follow her questions with my the notation, “……REPLY” as the lead int to the REPLY. Regarding the indication, company seems to have chosen a series of symptoms that people can self-identify. One difficulty in self-diagnosis may be found in the numbers that are part of the OTC indication - "two or more for at least three months." The number of and duration of the symptoms are as important as the symptoms themselves in leading a consumer to make the correct self-selection decision. ……….REPLY: realistically, I think most men who are seeking treatment are going to have more than 1 symptom. Waking to go, however, could be do to poor evening fluid consumption habits in a non-BPH person. So, I opt for 2 or more. How do my colleagues feel about men choosing the product if they have just one symptom and have had it for fewer than 3 months? ……….REPY: it is not just the number but how bothersome the symptoms are. It is the “bothersomeness” of symptoms that motivate people/men to seek self-care or Rx therapy. Also, 3 months is okay, but in reality men will translate this to “a long time.” Keep the 3 months, but know no one will look at a calendar. Is there a safety argument would you recommend that company make to the FDA if they have men in their self-selection studies who fall into that category or self-selection decision error? ………REPLY: see prior replies. I think it does not really matter, as most men will likely have 2 or more symptoms. In any case, this is like some of the other discussions where consumer input on the question would be helpful. Are there particular concerns that you have regarding self-selection errors as they relate to warnings on the tamsulosin hydrochloride label? Which ones do you think are the absolute contraindications that would put men in such danger that if consumers with those contraindications incorrectly self-selected to use tamsulosin hydrochloride these errors would kill the OTC program? ……….REPLY: acute urinary retention, extreme difficulty passing even a drop of urine, any credible data that showed men with blood in their urine, discharge from their penis ignored the warnings.
The ability of patients to accurately self-select could be tested, if you have not done this already, by getting a cohort of men of appropriate age, asking them to self-select by info on package insert and then have them evaluated by an expert (history only) who would use guideline recommendations and expert knowledge to determine best apporach for the specific subject patient. Then an analysis is done of the concordance between pt self-selection and selection by expert. This type of study where consumer behavior is examined and immediately followed by an expert evaluation and then reviewing concordance of these two measures has been used to test consumer accuracy in self-selection for other drug classes.
I agree with this approach and know of one switch product approved that used a similar construct for the AUS. Best to pre-define criteria as much as possible. It's hard to predict every scenario, but the an independent panel of 2 to 4 experts can adjudicate which situations are ideal, not perfect but acceptable due to low medical risk, and those that represent a potentially serious negative medical outcome.
This is a short question but one that we could talk about for a very long time. Andrea also raises some interestig ponts. The usual starting point for me is what is the current standard for the safety/efficacy profile based on the approved Rx labeling. Key is that this label serves as the bench mark and summary of the clinical data and post marketing experience that establishes the standard that physicians use to prescribe and monitor a patient. With that said, key issue for switch is how do you translate the approved labeling including practice standards for the Rx product to the consumer OTC label. With that said, how does the consumer/OTC label handle the Rx guidance to the physician that states:"Screening for Prostate Cancer Prostate cancer and BPH frequently co-exist; therefore, patients should be screened for the presence of prostate cancer prior to treatment with tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules and at regular intervals afterwards." Are we saying this does not occur and it is no big deal and that the benefit of having tamsulosin hydrochloride OTC will outweigh the risk as having prostate cancer. While the consumer may be treating symptoms are they missing an underlying condition? Underlying prostate cancer and other conditions,including orthostatic hypotension, may not occur in a large number of patients but they still exist and are noted in the Rx label. So issue is how do you change the practice standard that was used to establish the Rx label and remove conditions of safe use for OTC use. company will need to take this head on and build case on how consumers will use the product and select the product and when to stop. ( Still going to be hard to get around the prostrate screening unless you work with AUA to change practice standards and the Rx label)
Theon Greyjoy has summarized one of the foundational concerns that reviewers and experts express whenever confronted with a switch proposal that treats a chronic condition: "Are we saying this does not occur and it is no big deal and that the benefit of having tamsulosin hydrochloride OTC will outweigh the risk as having prostate cancer. While the consumer may be treating symptoms are they missing an underlying condition? " Much of the theme of my responses to this and other questions has been to go back to what aging men are doing in the real world. This needs to be carefully documented because my understanding is that, like women with OAB, they are silently coping with this common condition of aging and not taking it seriously enough to seek out professional advice. So the worries about missing an undiagnosed condition already exist without the presence of an OTC option for symptom relief. And let's not forget that some are resorting to food supplement remedies like Saw Palmetto and a whole host of so-called prostate health remedies that are mass marketed with unsubstantiated claims. The argument needs to be made and supported that the tamsulosin hydrochloride product itself PLUS a responsible educational and support program will promote awareness and appropriate professional consultation beyond what is currently happening. Hard to prove, but perhaps more cancers or other more serious conditions will be detected when an OTC option exists with the accompanying informational support.
Here's an interesting study (abstract below) from Mayo on the issue of contraindications and misdiagnosis. I go this from a simple BPH by misdiagnosis PubMed search. So, my take on the discussion so far is that there seems to be a piece of homework needed, if the informality is not already available to the company. And that is to do (1) a lit search, more expanded than the quick look here; and (2) a study with a large claims database re BPH, BPH Rx and subsequent Dx of (list your underlying conditions). With a good programmer I know this type of study takes about 3 months, with 1 month set-up, at relatively low cost...and you can easily get the big numbers needed for this type of study. . ....anyway, here's the abstract as an example of what may already be published. BJU Int. 2005 Mar;95(4):549-53. Prevalence of conditions potentially associated with lower urinary tract symptoms in men. Gades NM1, Jacobson DJ, Girman CJ, Roberts RO, Lieber MM, Jacobsen SJ. Author information 1Department of Health Sciences Research, Division of Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. gades.naomi@mayo.edu Abstract OBJECTIVE: To estimate the frequency of conditions associated with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS, typically included when assessing benign prostatic hyperplasia, BPH), as other causes of LUTS should be excluded when diagnosing BPH, using data from the Olmsted County Study of Urinary Symptoms and Health Status among Men. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: During 1989-91, Caucasian men aged 40-79 years were randomly selected from the Olmsted County population. Before contact, eligibility was determined by reviewing the community medical records. Baseline exclusion criteria included comorbid pre-existing conditions or treatments, e.g. prostate, bladder or lower back surgery, bladder neck contracture or cancer, diabetes with lower extremity amputation, and neurological diseases, including Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, tabes dorsalis and stroke. Men with these conditions were excluded from the Olmsted County Study at baseline, because these conditions are potentially associated with LUTS. RESULTS: Of the 5100 randomly sampled men, 13.4% met at least one of the pre-existing exclusion criteria. Individually, the frequency of exclusions was 7.8% for prostate cancer or surgery, 4.8% for back surgery, 1.3% for bladder surgery and 1.4% for neurological conditions. All other conditions represented <1.0% of the study exclusions. Older men were more likely to meet at least one of the exclusion criteria, with men in their fifth to eighth decade having a total exclusion frequency of 1.4%, 5.4%, 8.5% and 32.8%, respectively. The most common reason for men in their fifth decade to be excluded was lower back surgery (0.9%), whereas the most common reason in the eighth was prostate surgery (21.8%). CONCLUSIONS: In men, conditions that may contribute to LUTS, other than BPH, are prevalent in the community and increase in frequency with age. It is important that other conditions associated with LUTS be excluded before a definitive diagnosis of BPH. Any oversight in t
Self-recognition of the symptoms of BPH is the important issue to be tested. My assumption is that most men will recognize most of the listed symptoms if reflects a symptom that is bothersome to that individual. If men don't relate to any of the symptoms they are unlikely to purchase and use the product.
Is there any comfort that could be derived from actual use data that could mitigate the self-selection errors about which my colleagues are worried?
I may be a little confused here- what exactly do you mean by self-selection?
In other words, if a man makes a self-selection error because he has an underlying condition of concern, is there anything in his behavior once he starts using the drug that could mitigate the concern that people have over his having chosen to use the drug in the first place? Would stopping at 2 weeks be enough? Is there something else that you would like to see?
One of the occasional limitations of the OTC label is that the section on "ask a doctor before use if" is separated from the section on "stop use and ask a doctor if:..." And, a consumer using the product is not likely to focus in on the section that says "ask a doctor before use if..." FURTHERMORE, If the OTC label is stating to not begin use due to the presence of certain symptoms of diseases of concern, then why would use of the alphaB reduce the emergence of, for example, pus in the urine, inability to urinate, extreme hunger etc. etc. (see OTC label). Perhaps a way to approach this to (a) repeat certain of the symptoms in the do not use if section in the stop use if appears OR (b) take a stab at integrating the two sections in some way.
ok. i think i understand. no- stop at 2 weeks and see a healthcare professional should be adequate
What if, in the actual use study, there are some men who should stop after two weeks but take the drug longer than that, stopping after 3 or 4? How much additional clinical risk do you think this would incur and why?
I think selection of subjects for the study and the study n work against this being as meaningful as hoped. Given the relatively slow progression of some of the concerning underlying conditions, 3-4 weeks would not provide enough data to be superior to medical opinion...as much as I like data.
Okay. So what I'm going for is a rationale that company can use to address those men who were not perfectly adherent to the product label regarding duration of use.
I guess the answer to Andrea's question is.... it depends. Can you have an incorrect answer for self selection and still be correct based on symptoms. Isn't the main issue that the consumer could be using the drug to treat symptoms but these symptoms may be related to something other than BPH? Since many of the warnings cant be Dx by the consumer. So are you right and get relief for the wrong reasons. This is where a study vs real world Rx and physician standard of care may be helpful vs the OTC setting
